welcome everyone to this week's ipld
sync meeting it's november the 2nd
2020 and as
every week we go over the stuff that
we've done in the last week and
then over the stuff that we planned for
next week
and discuss open gender items
um i start with myself
so the kind of like the big news and a
big relief is that
finally rust multi hash 0.12 is released
this is the thing that contains the tiny
multi-hash stuff which was a fork of
multi-hash something like
a few months ago so now you can really
use the rust mod
as a replacement for tiny multihash in
case you have used it
and it's now no standard compatible
which means for those are not that
familiar with rust means that
you can use it on systems which don't
have an allocator
and um yeah so it doesn't do any
allocations on the heap for the
multihead stuff um but there's
obviously some functionality where you
want to have support for this so for
example if you want to get the into a
proper vector or so on
yeah but it's just an option to do um
yeah so that's pretty cool um and then
the other stuff on the ipod what i did
was an exploration report about
extending
the schema maps with more
advanced list pair representation
um it's kind of related to the string
discussions
but it's also a nice kind of like in a
separate way
um and yeah i have even more thoughts
about
this kind of thing but i still have to
write it down or yeah think about it
more
but i think this one like this really is
interesting i think because it also
gives kind of a different view on like
or like
a separation between schemas and data
models and how they relate and so on so
i think it's yeah
i think it's a like in case you are
um um you are flooded by the all these
string whatever discussion
and don't want to read it all i think
this one certainly is even outside the
discussion worth read
so if you haven't read any of the other
stuff that's independent and yeah
have a look um
[Music]
yeah it's the short version is you can
build
like higher level things with the basic
data model
in the schemas um i think that's all i
did
last week so next on my list is
danielle
cool so my notes this week are quite a
lot more verbose because i thought
i mean it's good for myself to keep
notes of what i've been doing but also
historically when i look at the notes in
the future
uh so essentially i did finish the go
multi-codec
new implementation with an external
contributor last week
but i hadn't actually pushed it to the
main repo until now
so now i've unarchived the repo there's
a pull request to delete all the
existing code
and add the new implementation it code
generates
all the codes as go constants initially
we said
untyped constants but now they do have a
codec type
which might need to be called code i'm
not sure input welcome
but the whole point of having a named
type is so that we can have methods like
string
which i think is nice because otherwise
they're just integers and you can't
really do much with them unless you have
separate functions uh we also had a
couple of more string calls
mostly with volker i know that the topic
is a little overdone but at least for me
it was useful to get up to speed because
i wasn't
i also got introduced to andrew's
ecosystem dashboard
so i think the point here is that right
now we have people that maintain repos
and packages and so on but sometimes
things do
fall through the cracks and get
forgotten just because we have so many
repos
so i think i'm gonna start essentially
keeping an eye
at least once a week or so on issues and
pull requests
from external people that we might have
forgotten about so say
hasn't had a comment from us in a few
days or a few
weeks or so on and also some more hemp
work um i added about an hour ago i
added
if varex code gen prs get merged i'll be
so happy because my code will get so
much better but i see one of them has
already merged so that's good
but i've been reviewing those also i've
been adding
some more tests from the point of view
of the go api
because i expect that all the internal
details that
you know people wouldn't directly use
directly will be covered by the spec
compliance tests which i assume are
still a priority for
for this quarter uh and i'm of course i
already offered my help
in getting those done because i will be
using them and
i also implemented initial support for
link loading i you know
know it's referencing other nodes but
it's kind of messy at the moment so i'm
going to post the pull request tomorrow
and the last thing i have is that
tomorrow i'm going to be on the go time
show
talking about it's a podcast by the way
talking about what features you could
remove from go
which i think is an interesting topic as
opposed to you know everybody's talking
about adding features so i've got some
ideas like you know
dot import or like struct embedding and
things like that which i honestly hate
but if anybody has any ideas i'll be
happy to bring them up tomorrow
thanks
next to melissa's draw
a link in the docs uh okay so
um busy busy thick week of work i felt
like i was
working a bit too late at night and then
deep into my weekend just because i was
doing that focus thing that you know how
it goes you get in the zone and you just
bang it out um i think that's michael's
usual mode with uh
with weekends i can't can't let go of
something and
anyway um so i i was doing um the
car to schemer thing i finished well i
didn't finish it up because there's so
much more in this area but i it's
at a state that i wanted to get it to
for this initial
purpose like how far can we push this
thing
in utility with minimal work
uh without creating a whole new rabbit
hole um
so so this thing now does this
multi-stage thing where you can
you can run it across a car file and
it'll just find the common forms in
there and describe them with schemas
and then just give you a huge list and
stats about how frequently they're
encountered
and then you can add in a library of
known schemas to it as well and
they'll run with it with known schemas
and it'll add them to the mix
and then and so when you add your own
schemas you can start
to make common the shapes that you know
are common like for example in
in the file coin data the the hemp
uh because it's variable arity
you have these blocks that have between
it's like between 1 and 32 elements in
an array
but it's all the same data structure but
they end up getting described as
separate things because it doesn't know
how to
it doesn't know the same thing so once
you start describing that with a schema
and say okay now this is actually a
this is just an array of elements and it
can be potentially any
length um then you start to capture
all of the variations into one thing um
so you build up a library and then
eventually you
you find no um novel
schemas in there and then you've
described all of the things and then you
can get stats on
where they will appear so i did that for
the five point down there's there's a
couple of other little
neat hacks in there like um because the
fire the falcon data is so big
it can do things like uh you run it
across the thing with your library and
you say
any novel blocks that you find put them
into another car file over here
and then you can use that to keep on
incrementally making your
novel car file smaller and smaller and
so it's quicker and quicker to do these
iterations to describe schemas so
i can imagine this being an interesting
way of
doing schema development for existing
data um
for validating schemas that you've
manually written for
forms like i want to go i want to use
this now to go back to the bitcoin data
because i'm in the middle of that
bitcoin spec
and actually verify that the schemas
that i've manually written
for the bitcoin shapes uh actually
matches what
the data the variations of the data that
i'm spitting out for that so
that's another use case um it's quite
nice for
but there are limitations because
because this is looking at blocks
without context this is coming back to
that whole context discussion that we
keep on having
which is fascinating and i do find this
become this bit fascinating
the limits of context and what context
you need
we're encountering blocks context-free
it's just a block with a cid
um so yes you can describe the shape and
you can match it to schemas and
and so far there's no
there's no clear as far as i can find
maybe
maybe we'll could think something off
the top of his head there's nothing in
the file coin
um schemas that uh
conflicts obviously so there's no
not like two completely different data
structures that encode looking the same
so there's a lot of things with like
there's a lot of uh
tuples with two elements in them but in
most cases they're either attached to
something else
all the two elements are switched around
in order so you've got string and bytes
but then you've got back and string
and so by accident we've got all these
unique forms that
um you can encounter within the schemas
and
within the file the the blocks and say
you know this this is actually this
thing over here
even though if you switch those elements
around it would be something over the
other side
um but there's all these data structures
that in the middle of things like the um
particularly the hampton the amt where
if you've got the leaf nodes then and
they're storing inline values you know
what it is
and there's a lot of you know a lot of
these particularly the hemp
um a a large number of nodes are leaf
nodes because the ham
doesn't just have a leaf layer the
leaves can be
scattered throughout it but with the amt
you've got a leaf
layer and then everything above that is
intermediates and that whole space
everything looks the same and so that
context of
how did i get to this node what linked
me to it
you can't know what what it's hanging
off of
um so i i and and also if you
don't inline the values if you put cids
at the end of the leaves in your data
structures then it all looks the same
so i've got schemas that are like
they're called
amt non-leaf or amt
with links and so you can collect these
things but
and and so far there's there's a limited
number of things that actually have
links at the leaves a lot of these
structures are in line
but if we if we were to encourage them
to link them rather than line them to
safe churn then that would that probably
go that way
would exacerbate so
so the ideal state is somewhere that you
can like this is helpful for schema
authoring and getting everything pinned
down
but to go further with this analysis you
really do need random access to
blocks like you need these things in a
block store where you can actually start
querying them and then build up that
that chain and that connects to some of
the work michael's been doing with
putting this stuff into a data store you
can actually retrieve from
and also stuff i think that will be
doing with the graphql
um stuff where you're describing these
connections and and that
i think is that's really important work
for us is to to
to figure out the the the
the way that context works with these
blocks and how we can
build that into our tools in a way that
is not super expensive
because you know when we're talking
about like a car file that's 400 gigs
and you're wanting to do context you
know just becomes out of hand
so um so anyway that's
yeah interesting work there lots of
other avenues for going further
uh i think the far coin team would love
answers right now i see the farcoin team
pushing ahead with
uh just optimizations that they think
are good
uh like steven's currently expanding the
uh
the width of the amt um which which we
everyone thinks is good but i don't
think anyone knows how
wide it should be uh and there's a whole
lot of questions there about the amt
that we don't have answers to would this
kind of data should be able to provide
answers to like
one of the things michael and i have
discussed is is fetching out the
the values from all these data
structures into a separate thing
and even ordering the operations that
they where they have edited in the chain
because this is live data so
if you could pull out all the values and
all the mutations record them
and then play them back against other
data structures or variations in the
data structures you could answer all
these questions
you could say here's the kind of turn if
you increase the width
this uh here's the kind of the kind of
savings you would get if you swapped it
out for this other data structure
um like that that would that's high
value work
uh that would be good to do at some
point um
soonish but um i i'm not
right now as my second item on the list
is i'm backing up to
i really have to close out some of these
things i've left open i've left a trail
of open work
and um and i have to close them out so
so i the second half of my week i went
back to my
car work and um
part of that was designing a new block
story jpi
that could potentially be shared in
common with other javascript
block storage systems um so there was
just some design work in that and how
can we think about this how can we
extract out some of the
like using this data store api has just
been just been terrible because he just
puts too much into the the format
but this new abstraction that um
gazala helped me get to is really pulls
it apart into function
functionality so you can address these
storage structures just
in the in for the particular
functionality that you need
um so if you need random access like
just to get
random blocks then yeah you can have
that but if you just need to iterate
over it then you can just load it as an
iterator and say i just want i just want
all of the i want to see what's in there
or even just i want to see all the cds
then that's a separate thing that you
can say here's my car
data in whatever form you give it
whether it's a as a binary blob or as a
stream or whatever give me all the cids
and then you just
get an iterator so it's it's pulled
apart into these separate functions
from pieces of functionality um the apis
are separate enough that you could load
them separately and only get the code
paths
in your bundle that that need that um
and along the way with that i
spent half of my week learning how to
include
typescript annotations in my code and in
my build step
which was um you know been meaning to
really get more of a handle on
typescript and um
i've been doing that last little while
and um that's turned out to be really
nice it sucks a lot less than i thought
and um and it adds a really nice linting
step to the build process
so you've got linting but then you've
got the structural linting
which can legitimate like it's
legitimately finding errors
which is fantastic so i'm getting some
of those benefits of types without going
full typescript so it's just
plain javascript with typescript
annotations and some
and using typescript to describe the api
as well um so there's a link in the docs
to
for example the external api um
typescript
doc that is not it's not used as a
as a um a core part of the code but it's
exported
and it's used to validate all the code
paths within the whole thing including
tests
so um yeah i'm happy with that and um
i'm gonna continue doing that but uh
this car stuff's pretty much done i just
need to get the docs written for it and
then published
and then i can tick that one off so
anyway
that's me sorry for taking too much time
thanks and next one is peter
right so i actually don't know where my
week went
uh very very little uh
things that are important to iplt
a few points actually tied with what rob
said
uh if i managed to get lotus to play
ball
with a lot of strict embedding by the
way like without certain betting this
this wouldn't be even
possible uh because i basically need to
split
one interface into three separate ones
while still allowing for
you know without having to change a ton
of code like this
block store interface specific and
motors are used in like
350 to 400 sites and
i need to break them apart without
coming to the right of the world so
that's not great
but uh if everything works right or not
you will
have access to
individual blocks from this block store
that actually can do you know concurrent
uh key source starts with s and ends
with three
uh which is essentially the only
thing that can keep everything that we
need at scale right now yes we still
need the
resume to figure out some way to do um
to do you know non-aws hosted blog
stores but
at the scale which we are going there is
not going to be a possibility to do
any of this on a single machine pretty
much very soon
even if you put all of this into uh
into ipfs without the dht provider just
you know just i have this
even at just storing the blocks
at the scale the amount of blocks that
we need we cannot
do this on a single ipfs instance
anymore uh because of battery and other
limitations so
um it's great that the work is happening
you know to get our
data stores a little bit more uh
performant but we basically need like a
10 200 x improvement uh and until then
uh what's going to happen is basically
the chain will migrate mostly to
s3 and uh the twist to this is that
there should be a way to get lotus to
bootstrap from that as well provided
we have a separate way to feed it uh
what is the current head that we assume
is correct
and if somebody wants to you know wants
to walk through the entire
uh chain from genesis all the way uh
they can still do that because
uh block storage is blog store it
doesn't you know it doesn't matter
where you get the stuff from uh the hash
will match and we'll you know to
validate so
it's all good but yeah that's uh what
i've been trying to do
here since friday and it's calling but
not
well enough because like our block store
abstraction is so
bad it's like it's not as bad as our
that store abstraction
in golan specifically but yeah they're
all
at some point we need to design things
that
work with dags in mind almost nothing we
do right now
on the storage side has this in place
like for instance
the the the simplest thing uh being able
to gc
for this ideally you know especially
with tax you need to
be able to reference scouting in order
to do reference counting
you need to know a block that you just
stored what other links does it have
if you want to do this today you
basically in the in the blog store you
have to parse every single block and
pull the links out which is crazy
instead we would have an interface which
says like hey store this blog and those
are by the way the links that it refers
to
and you know from there on you don't
have to do anything but because of how
our interfaces are built that's not
possible
uh there are also the things like you
know we already talked about
um the enumeration of every single block
that you have in the
in the store and uh also the way the
the put interfaces work is you know
batching is
weird so yeah um
yeah mini rant there uh but we we
probably need to come up with better
ways to do things
uh because yeah what we have right now
just doesn't scale
and we'll probably get plenty of
experience with that as well in
uh in the lenses world uh and
yeah that's pretty much all i have just
for reference
um just for reference dagdb has that
indexing that you just talked about
um db has its own block store
abstraction and
it index every time you write a block it
writes all of the to and from links
in that block so you can always go and
check we use it for
efficient graph synchronization so you
can tell if you have a full graph or not
um really easily but um you could also
use it for gc
um that was one of the intentions of it
but but do you do you intuit the links
yourself
or the api requires you to supply like
here is a block and here are the links
no no when you write a block it looks at
the lengths and then writes that at
those indexes
it's like literally like on put yeah but
does it parse the block itself
or you feed it the links
who does the parsing basically do do you
have the falcon problem that you have to
understand
everything that is being written into it
or is just opaque and you
just say here's the block and here are
the links that this block refers to
separately
um i think it i think it parses them
because
it works with full block instances so
they already have a cached
um decode if they've been decoded so
i think i think it just reads the links
out it doesn't take them
yeah it doesn't take them from it
because like again you're writing to and
from
so every new block that gets written has
the to and from so you can always look
up a block and
know all the blocks that that were that
were written as a result
or all the blocks of reference there
right like that that's the point of
doing to and from so that you can
yeah yeah yeah but yeah but in your case
you also have
you also have the code is stable right
you don't get like random random blocks
that you
don't know how to get the links out of
so there is that as well
oh right yeah i know that's true yeah
yeah
they're all dexy more because this
database
makes a decision about that yeah
okay and next one is eric
i've got a lot of exciting stuff this
week so i sat down and i did code
yay and go ipld prime cogen basically
got a ton
of new features some of them are still
in draft form but they're very exciting
a couple of small things that are ease
of use landed for codegen
for example maps and lists got a bunch
more typed iterators generated so if
you've been using some of the cogen
alphas
and you thought it felt like there was
missing stuff there that would make your
code suck less
you were right and it's there now so
rerun your generation and you should
have nicer things
um i ran into these while trying to
prototype writing some bigger things
myself
using the schema cogent output and
it was it was just very visible that we
needed some more of these methods so
that like once you have
um you know in the native type system
what you're holding on to
you should be able to traverse over
those data structures and continue to
know
what the native type of the subsequent
things is
previously a bunch of the iterators like
ditched that and went to the
overly generic node interface and now
there's alternative methods which will
keep you with the concrete information
and those are
a lot easier to use they'll probably go
faster because the compiler can inline
things around them
um autocomplete works you know things
that are good
there's another pr out that is about
rearranging the cogent output
so currently the code gen spits out a
file per type in your schema
um this is
a kind of this this has been terrible to
use because
among other things it means if you do
regeneration
and you've changed the names of some
types it doesn't go clean up the old
files so now it makes a finite number
file so you just don't have to worry
about that
we might iterate on the exact layout of
those files but basically getting to a
finite number is
improves usability significantly
and so the really big exciting thing is
we now have a draft of
the schema types that are used in this
go library
to to understand the schema type system
those are now re-implemented they've
previously been placeholders where if
you wanted to use any of the schema
system you had to use this really janky
temporary placeholder set of builder
methods
instead of like handing schema
information in in like the ipld schema
format that we worked so hard to make
accessible as json etc
instead of using any of that you'd have
to call these janky special
placeholder go away methods that is all
going in the bin
and now we have a draft of these schema
types re-implemented to
use the schema schema code gen
to produce types that match the data
model so now you can connect any ipld
codec
to those code gen outputs from the
schema schema
and that will match and recognize schema
dm dmt data model trees
and now you can parse those into the
fully ratified schema
system that the rest of this library
uses so we can glue that to cogen
the gluing decoding part's a little bit
draft still but it's probably going to
come out in the next week or two it's
almost there
so this is even before it's glued to
cogen this is getting really really cool
so this has tons more tests than the
existing stuff and so now we can take
stuff like
i have tests written which have a json
document of
schema and that can be parsed
it goes into the schema types
this is coming in two packages if you're
looking at it and go by the way there's
one package it's called schema dmt
so again dmt short for data model tree
contrast to ast which is an abstract
syntax tree this is conceptually the
same but there's no syntax attachment
because you can choose any ipld codec
right
so when you process things into the
schema dmt you have matched
the schema schema my apologies for how
self-referential the self-hosted system
is
um so once you've got that data you know
that it matches the structure of a
schema
and then you can parse that into the
full type system
references and the difference between
these is the one that handles the data
model tree
you can only do so many validations on
this you can check that it's the
structurally correct information but
also there are some other properties we
want like
we should validate that the whole type
system is complete that all
types that reference other types
actually
it's it has to be a connected graph and
uh verifying graph connectivity is
potentially computationally expensive
operation right
so we're not going to let the schema
system alone do that and this
second package validates that as it's
processing it
so like so by the time you're holding on
to that
all these things are validated and then
the rest of the go library uses
that fully validated stuff
so tests exist that go from json all the
way to that fully validated thing
some of the tests check that that works
some of the tests check that that
doesn't work and it returns a sane error
message
this is now including all of the
validation rules
which have never been implemented before
so this is kind of a big deal
and i'm hoping rod is going to be
available to review some of these with
me because i know we've talked about
a bunch of these before so now i finally
implemented them so all the
like little validation rules like an
inline union that contains structs as
members
it really ought to check at compile time
so to speak
that the inline union discriminant key
should not collide with any of the
struct
field names in the representation form
things like this yep and so we've had no
tooling to
validate this before now we do
there are i don't know how many rules
there are like this i should actually
count there are several dozen small
rules like this
and these are things where previously if
you wanted to write a schema you'd have
to
read the spec real closely and make sure
you didn't screw up
and now we're finally getting to having
automated tooling to recognize these
things so this is
going to be kind of huge
this is still only connected to json
parsing
but we already have other tools which go
from the schema dsl language
to json so we are
soon going to be able to just connect
those with a pipe character in the shell
and then we will have schema validation
tools that can take the full dsl
apply all the validation rules and we
are very close to ready to do this
in a way that we could put in ci or
wherever else somebody wants to put this
automation
so that's going to be a huge usability
unlock for this
whole suite of stuff i'm really excited
to get that across
very very soon now it's not plugged into
a cli yet but
soon so when i write the update for the
all hands i should say that our go code
is on dmt
your word's not mine no it's
it's dmt enriched
i've said many times before on the full
record that i am bad at naming things
and we have also many times before
talked about how we have
these structures that are almost like
asts but it's not with an s
block building better through chemistry
i'm perfectly willing to just utterly
deny everything we're talking about
forever
it's i think it's a great name
so speaking of no that's not really
naming i can't make that segway joke
um i've also got one more guest on
strings like volker mentioned we're
probably all tired of this but
hey here's a link um
this write-up is still largely oriented
around the thesis of this data exists
what are we actually going to do about
it um we got some new input on this this
week where
um jeremy actually came in and made sure
we looked at what ipfs
actually does which is maybe important
and so what actually is done
already turns out to be really
interesting so in cliff notes
it is possible to use ipfs add with
any file name where any file name means
of course
any sequence of bytes not necessarily
utf-8 not necessarily even unicode at
all
so jeremy tested that and there's a link
to the ipfs web gateway in here also
which is the result of that
and it turns out the dagp codec
stores the bytes we give it so this
works
it is interesting to note that the dag
pb codec documents this
as a string um the the
protobuf spec file says string
but it is clear that in actuality the
support range for this is a full
sequence of bytes it is not limited to
unicode
there's a comment saying maybe literally
has no differentiation between strings
and bytes
yep um so that's fun
the web gateways do largely handle this
correctly
with some exceptions that i will know in
a moment so the urls
in links in the web gateways for like
directories and stuff
these are fully precise they lose
nothing they use
sequences of escaping for bytes that are
non-unicode this ends up using percent
based escapes
that is normal for urls and can
apparently handle this entire range of
data
so all the data in all of the files if
you make whole directory trees like this
are all accessible through the links in
the web gateway
this is the general like anything that's
using dag pv data directly
generally handles things correctly
because it gets the raw data
so it works so the web gateway is one
example of that
the mounting subsystems also work they
will give you back
files with their full arbitrary file
names
but not everything works here's the
exception that i mentioned earlier
the dag json codecs which do get used in
some of the ap
the ipfs apis are currently as
implemented lossy and so we now have
this demo that is linked to in the web
gateway does exhibit this behavior
there are some cases where when
data is being encoded as a string in the
dag json codec
and i know exactly where this bug is i
wrote it myself i'm not happy about it
it will sometimes replace those invalid
utf-8 bytes
with the slash u
fffd escape sequence or maybe
replaces it with the byte replaces it
with the byte
and so this is lossy it throws away
bytes
so but this only shows up in some
places and i have not entirely traced
how the web gateway reaches this state
but what i can observe at the end of the
day
is the links are correct where they're
using url escaping and percents
but the file names as rendered are not
correct and they're going to render
well however your browser renders that
code
that is in my opinion a bug um
this sucks we should fix the dag json
codex to escape these things
and not throw away data
so one thing that i want to note before
we move on though is just like
it's pretty impressive that all of the
stuff is making it through the
gateway like all the escaping is
actually making it all the way into like
their trigger interpretation
um we have talked a lot about
doing a pathing spec and like this makes
me like very confident that we should
not write a pathing's back and then we
should point to the earl passback
because then we have all the same
escaping rules and we
we're not worried about people like not
implementing them in gateways and then
all these other like in between layers
so we can just use earl paths and then
we can write a spec about how they get
interpreted
when you're in the data model how they
get interpreted when you're in different
libraries like that's how we do the
interpretation
that's all yep
i'm basically thumbs up to all of that
it's it's
somebody made percent escaping it's
defined
i honestly haven't looked at it any more
deeply than this other than it evidently
works
well and there's a parser in every
language like every language has a
parser for earls and earl paths
everything that we would ever jam these
into in earl's and our paths is already
working like let's just use it
and yep that's that's all i'll say about
that
i think continuing this conversation in
the form of figuring out what we're
doing with pathing specifications is
also a really good way to go forward
so i agree that's it for me
and it would be really good to get doug
jason sort of
got a bunch of points in doug jason that
are not sorted out i'm using
jason more and more in test fixture
related things and um
and it really it's a real problem that
it's not consistent between languages
and not even internally consistent so
like to get that one hammered out fully
before i forget it again i've never
written this down before and i really
should
i realize that there's another bug with
the precision of dag json in the process
of this
json supports utf-8 bytes
just as the bytes right so you can have
whatever character
and it supports the slash you escaping
sequences
so our codecs do not preserve the
distinction
at least mine sure don't so we should be
increasing the strictness on that as
well we should probably actually in my
opinion forbid slash you escapes and dag
json
because
so more spec work yay yeah oh
some of the faces people are making yep
i know
i actually filed an issue about this a
few weeks ago
it was essentially about strings and dag
json you can encode them in many ways
and there's no consistency so we should
have a rule about that
i can link it in a second
sorry for not seeing that yes you are
incredibly correct
okay uh let's see i can go next um i
think i'm next
so so last week after
being put on the async generator path as
the
uh way to solve all my um
complexity on error handling um i ended
up abandoning it
uh working with michael it just it turns
out that the
graph sync protocol is a bit too complex
to
uh kind of fit into the iterator uh or
iterator generator paradigm we tried but
it just didn't quite it wasn't wasn't
converging so
i've switched back to uh kind of the old
school
way and been working on that so adding
in validation error handling for
uh the requester logic so that is my
update
to be clear the way that the protocol
works is that there's two streams one
for control and one for the blocks
and because of the way that it's it's
designed you can't actually implement
effective flow control
like you can't actually do a generator
over it and you can't actually like map
the right
pauses and resumes in that structure um
because
it wasn't really designed to think about
flow control like you can't even pause
from the client which is like crazy
and because it very much just looks like
bit swap in a lot of ways and bitswap
doesn't have this problem because you
always request a block so there's no
worry about flow control but in a point
to point protocol this is actually like
really important
and this seems to be like an actual like
real problem with the design of graph
sync in general that i don't think that
we're going to be able to overcome
without a new protocol
yes and i'm actually eager to write
another a new protocol that's
far simpler and uh but anyway that's
after this one
yeah well actually we were throwing
around some ideas about a protocol and
then i had a conversation with jeremy
and jeremy said that his original design
for graph sync sounded
just like what we were talking about so
i think it'll be well received by at
least one person
and next one is michael
okay so a lot of what i did last week
was get the reviews ready
uh for a pre-calibration call but um
other than that um what else did i do um
oh
did some more migration today to be
doing multiformat stuff um
i have to say i really do like these new
primitives um
they're like a lot nicer to work with
all the code's getting cleaned up
um it's it's really really nice um
then uh over the weekend i so i couldn't
get
um this thing that mccola figured out
out of my head for those sort of trees
and i started to think like what is the
simplest possible application of this
uh of this technique and what i realized
that it was
looks like is just a sorted set of cids
so not a map because like all you need
are things that are ordered by some
ordering and then you need something
that does hashes to do this right so you
just make
the key and the value of the hash
you order them by binary sort order and
then you use the last byte if it's zero
you just chunk on that so you don't have
to implement like a floating hash
algorithm or anything you just like rely
on the randomness
from the hash and um
i really just wanted to implement it so
that i could like see how it works in
practice
and see how you would implement it and
then to start to sort of look at some of
the performance dimensions of the
structure
having something that is this simple and
predictable will allow us to like really
kind of tweak the performance dimensions
and see what that produces in terms of
different block structures
with that you know once we start to add
in like you know a floating
fingerprint then it's going to get
really complicated um
like this this whole thing is going to
get much much more complicated
and it's going to be much harder to
predict a lot of this this behavior
um so i did that um
once i did that um i
a conversation that i had with jeremy
was stuck in my head where we were
talking about these block storage
problems
and i was relaying some of what me and
folker had talked about and
he even said i think outright like it
seems like the right solution to this
problem is an append only
b tree like a single file database
that's just depend only and i was like
yeah
and then once i implemented this tree i
was like oh
you could totally use this to implement
a pendle industry
or independently tree um so i started to
design that and worked it out as a
database file format
so this is really cool i've started
implemented and there's a pretty
detailed spec on the design right now
it's called cadb content address
database but effectively it's a database
that's just a single file
all of the keys have to be hash digests
and the values obviously are binary
blocks
it doesn't do any of its own validations
you have to make sure that you're giving
it like
good hashes and and everything and the
the block data matches
um the storage interface doesn't do that
for you
but basically you just use this that
same technique and then every time that
you
write a new entry you rewrite the leaves
that you've adjusted and blah blah like
it's typical kind of b plus tree stuff
um and yeah i'm pretty sure that this
will be like
the fastest way that we can write this
stuff to disk
in a maintained ordered balanced index
over time
we'll have to see what the reads look
like because the
the depth can get kind of big when
you're doing the tree like this um
the thing is though the the leaves are a
pretty predictable size once you know
the average hash digest size
so if you look at the depth of the tree
in the average half digest you can
actually compute
how much of an lru you would need to
keep the whole top of the tree in memory
so what you can do is you can just cash
the reads of all the leads and keep like
most of the trade memory so i think that
you can actually like
get really fast read performance even if
the tree gets really deep because you
can just keep the whole thing in memory
and you don't have to like set a you
don't have to mend map a file
or you don't have to like be proactively
ejecting things from the cache you can
literally just let
you let stuff fall out because the top
of the tree you're going to access
um so anyway um that's really cool
i'm working on implementing that if it
works and if it's performant then
i'll probably uh pull rod in after you
finish all of your dangling tasks
and work on a more unified spec and
hardening implementation and then
eventually
i'd like a new version of the car file
format that just uses this is the block
storage
and then we take the other stuff from a
car file like the header and the roots
and stick that somewhere because then
like
we would if we started using this as the
car file format then we would like
instantly get
um see index cid access to everything
right
and when you compact these they're
deterministic so we still have the
deterministic cast over a compacted
store and now as we ship around car
files like you don't actually have to
wait to load them
you can just like start the database on
them right
and they'll just work um it's kind of
nice like there's a lot of really really
nice properties to this format um
if we if we lock it down um so yeah
that's uh that's what i've been kind of
poking at
um on the research end
thanks um so
this time i scroll up to the agenda i
don't see any engine items but is there
anything anyone wants to talk about
yeah peter yeah i i i want to add to
what michael
said if you guys are actually looking
for
good caching performance i would
recommend splitting
the basically having two files having
the index
entirely separate from the data
which which is pretty terrible as far as
moving it around but
it's the most ideal thing for the vfs to
actually keep your
keep the right piece of bytes in memory
at all times
and the thing is and being able to
um to leverage uh
what was it called not pre-read but uh
prefetch previous display fetch
um i i don't know i mean i'll have to
see like if we keep the nodes in memory
it's not gonna be
much different and like the problem with
having two files is that
you no longer have the nice
transactional guarantee so like
um like i can write the lo like the nice
thing about this penduly file format is
that like the the page file is always
written as an atomic write
so this file's never in a state that's
unreadable or corrupted as long as you
insure these atomic rights so you just
do a bunch of right v's for the
for the page file um and then the last
thing in the page file is actually the
position and length of the current route
um so if but if you have two files then
you're like you don't know if you're in
a transactional state or not
um of updating something so you can't
like take a live database or block store
and just copy the file out
which would be really nice like to just
copy the block store out of your lotus
node without
shutting it down like this is like what
people do with couchdb actually it's
really really nice
um it's one of my favorite things about
that database
this is actually does it matter whether
there are two files or not because
whether you write
your your closure at in the second file
or not
is image the disk that there is there's
no such thing as a
as a sys call guarantee that
two rights to two separate fds happen at
the same time so there's just like
there's no way to ensure that
that you're in the same transactional
state between the two okay
um yeah at the file system layer at
least um
yeah and uh but also like i mean so you
have to keep them in a sorted tree
anyway in order to update them
so like like in the database
so that's why it's like not actual like
you you don't need a separate index
because you already have a sorted
structure like to do the lookups in um
right
like i don't think that there's actually
like much that we would get out of an
index in a separate file
i i think also like one advantage is if
you
take to to put dnx into a separate file
because like it's
linux really is like a secondary index
in
[Music]
this case so the actual data is in the
file and the index is
like a secondary index in the sense of
it doesn't contain any
data that is not in the file so you can
just throw it away
so you can always recreate the index and
if it's a separate file you can just do
it
or you just buy but you have to scan the
whole file
yeah to recreate the index yeah that's
i mean like yeah i don't i don't
think that's a great option
i mean honestly but that's what the
carbs thing is doing right now
right yeah yeah yeah but but but that is
because you
the the structure of the file format for
the car file doesn't keep things in
order because it isn't actually a
database right like that's why it's a
secondary mix
now we eventually will probably end up
with a secondary file anyway because for
peter's thing
of maintaining the link indexes for the
for the gc that is not going to be in
the same file um
so that would still need to be a
separate file and probably export it
separately
um but you could do like a nice uh yeah
yeah it's also for us
the advantage of a second file is also
that you sometimes need different
guarantees
so for example for the main file you
really want to make sure that the fsync
really happen and so on
but basically if your index gets corrupt
it's i mean it shouldn't get corrupt but
if it does it's not a big deal because
you could always
regenerate it so you might end up with
busy systems where you put the index
file which is like
faster and might be have more errors or
something you don't get that much
i know but like here's the thing like i
understand why you would want to have a
secondary index
over a structure that wasn't well sorted
but like
this structure is actually like a
well-sorted structure in the file format
so i don't really see what what like the
index is only saving you like some
branch reads
effectively no but it but i mean your
append stuff is not sorted
like your pen no but the the pens are
writing references to a tree that is
sorted
like that's not how car files work right
like car files are just like atomic
block rights
so there's like there's no way to index
them without scanning it
whereas like this this on this structure
like every time that you
every time that you so okay you have a
database you do a set of rights those
manipulate parts of the tree
you rewrite all the branches that change
and any new block data and then you
rewrite the head
pointer for all of those branches so the
last head pointer to the root is to the
root of a sorted tree structure for
updating the actual index
so you have an index you have a
well-sorted structure for for
seeking into the file and like finding
what you need um
so the secondary index like doesn't
really save you much especially once
once things get a little bit hot
no are you are you essentially rewriting
the entire index every time
at the end of the file essentially the
parts that change right
the parts are changed yeah yeah but if
you only write the parts that change
then
your thing is no longer sorted because
you have stuff here you have stuff at
the beginning of the file you have stuff
all over the place the tree is the so
hold
is the same regardless of compaction
where they
are in the disk changes if you compact
so like this is what we're talking about
like throughout that whole structure
throughout that whole file format
a bunch of places don't have data in
them but that doesn't actually
impact the performance of the tree
because the tree is still the same shape
regardless of whether you compact it or
not because as you change it you're it's
rebalancing with the with the hash
i guess the point that i would say is
your reads
especially on a cold start you're doing
login reads
uh of on down that tree to get to your
data item
and all of those are now happening out
of your file so that's
login random seeks if you have your
index in a separate file you can put it
fully in your ssd and you can have those
reads
through that much smaller index
structure happen faster
even in cold cases and only do a single
read on your i o disk
to reach i mean like that that makes
sense if you're exporting a bunch of
data and then reloading it in to get
something fast up and running right
but it doesn't make a lot of sense at
all if you're maintaining that index as
part of the database right
because you have to rewrite the entire
[ __ ] index every time
just the parts that change in the same
way right you could do your same
structure
of a tree thing where you're rewriting
the parts of the metadata that's
changing
in the secondary file that's on your ssd
oh yeah well the secondary index
and and and your i o one is just a log
file system that's still just appending
the blocks as they get written
what i meant with with saying like what
i was saying is that we see what you
call
index is like a secondary index so i'm
not
talking about having another secondary
index but basically what you call index
is like a secondary index
from the properties like your
your index doesn't contain primary data
the primary data is the append only
thing in the leaves
somebody busy so for my definition a
secondary index is an index which
which can always be recreated from the
original data
a primary index is an index which
contains data which if you lose it
you're yeah you don't have a chance yes
i mean
and this is the thing about yeah that
you're yeah
i think the linux and therefore you
could as well said you could potentially
even in your case you could just put
this thing into a separate file if you
would want to
yeah i mean the separate file index has
to be loaded entirely into memory right
that's how you use that idx right
currently the car file uh no it doesn't
need to take an map
because it it basically i mean uh to
generate it it does but for reads it
doesn't need to
so when it's when it's doing the lookups
after generation it's a b tree and it's
it's doing the the search and that's not
an mac backed
price of region where it doesn't all
need to be in memory at once
there is a file it it knows that that's
the sorted list of sids and
the offsets into the main data file that
those are it does log n reads into that
index file
to learn where the item is and then it
does one read into the car file to
get the item yeah that that tree
structure
is yeah like that is effectively the
exact same
data structure that i'm already writing
to the pendlete file
it's actually it's all in one compact
thing
because i'm doing a single scan over it
but you could and and
uh it is because it's just that implicit
record array
that it's using as its sorted list of
those sids what you can do is you can
have
a tree and you can have the branches and
you can write a new route and and
maintain your metadata in an append only
way as well
like you're imagining doing on your car
um
the random access is just like not an
issue on ssds as much
so like i'm not like it's not actually
it's still pulling in a larger block
on each read so there if you can get
locality that's sometimes nice and
that's what you would get with your
uh i think as a byproduct of your
updates is that like your root and the
things close to the root often will be
all written all changing at least a path
of them and you'll end up with those in
the same block that's getting pulled
back into memory
um so that's worth thinking about maybe
but i suspect you're right that it
really doesn't matter that much
that the the things near the root are
just all going to end up in memory
anyway
and it's the things close to the leaves
that are get to being actual rates
i mean like the tree that you're talking
about is effectively is
very much like the tree that i'm talking
about it's just that my tree has the
actual block data
written alongside it all right and so
it's like all in the same file
um i mean one thing that i do do though
like um
i keep separate file descriptors open
for reading and writing um just so that
the
um so the position on the on the reader
is always the same so
that actually is a lot nicer um it does
speed things up quite a bit but
i don't like the access is not usually a
huge deal but i don't know
i'll benchmark it and see what it looks
like
just on micro benchmark benchmark like
it's all disk operations there is no
micro benchmark
[Laughter]
the people investigating the block
stores want to want to work with you
all right and is there anything else
i can say i've got a pr that uh
generates a graphql schema out of an
ipld prime schema
i'm starting to work through
auto-generating
uh graphql server
from that as well so that you can serve
out of your my pld data store
um and then deal with queries that
people
come in that are in an ipld format so
basically that's
additional cogen that follows the
existing golang
cogen
and figuring out how those two connect
but that's that's the current thing i'm
working on
that's really cool
yeah cool um
we are out of time so then i close the
meeting and so thanks everyone for
attending and see you all again next
week